docs: add docs for the historical state generation using binary diff layers (#7665)
ChainSafe/lodestar: docs/pages/contribution/advanced-topics/historical-state-regen.md

---
title: Understanding Historical Sate Regeneration
---

## Understanding Historical Sate Regeneration

> To run a blockchain client and establish consensus we need latest headers and forkchoice data. This operation does not require to historical data, specially after the epochs which are finalized. Storing the full state information for the finalized slots increase the storage requirement a lot and not suitable for running the node for long time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a blockchain client and establish consensus we need the latest headers and forkchoice data. This operation does not involve historical data, specifically for periods that have already been finalized. Storing the full state information for the finalized slots increases the storage requirement significantly and is not suitable for running the node long-term.
```

### Solution

> To overcome the storage problem for the archive nodes we implemented following algorithm to store and fetch the historical sates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To overcome the storage problem for the archive nodes, we implemented the following algorithm that efficiently stores and fetches historical sates.
```

#### Approach

Assume we have following chain represents the state object every slot, with following diff layer configurations `1,2,3,5`. With assumption that we have 8 slots each epoch, The following configuration for layers implies:

1. We store the snapshot every 5th epoch.
2. We take diff every epoch, every 2nd epoch and every 3rd epoch.

Please see the following table for more understanding of these layers.

> ![historical-regen](docs/static/images/historical-regen/historical-regen.png)

Reviewer: Missing image?

3. We always try to find the shortest hierarchical path to reach to the snapshot layer, starting from the top most layer.
4. For rest of the layers we recursively find the binary difference and only store the diffs on the upper layers.

Let's take few scenarios:

1. For slot `0` all layers collide, so we use the lowest layer which is the snapshot layer. So for the slot `0` we store and fetch the snapshot.
2. For slots (0-7) within first epoch we there is no intermediary layer, so we read the snapshot from slot `0`.
3. For slots (8-15) the path we follow is `8 -> 0`. e.g. For slot `12`, we apply diff from slot `8` on snapshot from slot `0`. Then we replay blocks from 9-12.
4. For slot `18` the shortest path to nearest snapshot is `16 -> 0` and rest will follow same as above.
5. For slot `34` the path we follow `32 -> 24 -> 0`.
6. For slot `41` path for the nearest snapshot slot is just one layer directly at slot `40`.

As you can see with this approach we can find a shorter paths with smaller number of diffs to apply, which generate the nearest full state and reduce the number of blocks we have to replay to reach to actual slot.

### Constants

> To derive the right values for layers, we developed a mathematical approach that provides an estimation based on different parameters in the system.

Reviewer: Need to add more description like what you did in #7629 
eg. what variables are we trying to adjust here

$$
\begin{align*}

> Cost &= \frac{w_{s}* Storage + w_{b} \times Backup_Time + w_{r} \times Restore_Time}{(n \times T_{diff} + T_{full}) \times G_{max}} + (G_{min} \times T_{replay}) \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cost &= \frac{w_{s}* Total\_Storage + w_{b} \times Backup\_Time + w_{r} \times Restore\_Time}{(n \times T_{diff} + T_{full}) \times G_{max}} + (G_{min} \times T_{replay}) \\
```

> Total_Storage &= F \times S_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i}\times S_{diff}\\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Total\_Storage &= F \times S_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i}\times S_{diff}\\
```

Reviewer: Are you looking to do camel case `TotalStorage` or underscore `Total_Storage` here?

> Backup_Time &= F \times T_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i} \times T_{diff}\\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backup\_Time &= F \times T_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i} \times T_{diff}\\
```

> Restore_Time &= F \times R_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i} \times R_{diff}\\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restore\_Time &= F \times R_{full} + \sum\limits_{i=1}^{n}D_{i} \times R_{diff}\\
```

\\
\text{Where as}\\
\\
F &= \text{Frequency of full backup}\\
D &= \text{Frequency of differential backup}\\
S_{full} &= \text{Size of full backup}\\
S_{diff} &= \text{Size of differential backup}\\
T_{full} &= \text{Time to take full backup}\\
T_{diff} &= \text{Time to take differential backup}\\
T_{replay} &= \text{Time to replay a block}\\
R_{full} &= \text{Time to restore full backup}\\
R_{diff} &= \text{Time to restore differential backup}\\
G_{max} &= \text{Max gap between backups (usually the snapshot gap)}\\
G_{min} &= \text{Minimum gap between backups (usually the top layer gap)}\\
w_{s} &= \text{Weight for total storage}\\
w_{b}&= \text{Weight for total backup time}\\
w_{r} &= \text{Weight for total restore time}\\
n &= \text{Number of differential layers}\\
\end{align*}
$$

> As there are lot of parameters in the system and we don't have accurate values for these so we started few possible estimates. Also as the chain is ever growing data structure the value for `F` is not finite. We decided to do this estimation based on 30 days time period and `mainnet` parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As there are lots of parameters in the system and we don't have accurate values for these, we started with a few possible estimates. Also as the chain is ever growing data structure the value for `F` is not finite. We decided to do this estimation based on 30 days time period and `mainnet` parameters.
```

Reviewer: ```Also as the chain is ever growing data structure the value for `F` is not finite```

Need to rephrase this, I don't understand what this line is trying to say. By not finite, you mean it's not possible for `F` to be `1`?
